Happy Valentine’s Day!
A movie by name “Uyire” hit the theaters
in 1998.
By auteur Mani Ratnam.
There is a famous song in that movie… they
even call it the Title Song, which talks about
the Seven Stages of Love.
From seeing, to touching, through lust, to
love, all the way to the seventh stage…
pretty disastrous stage, that one.
I don’t want to spoil the ending for you,
watch it, at least watch this song..
Beautifully orchestrated and choreographed..!
What are the Seven Stages of Love?
Is there a lesson for us hiding there?
That is the topic of our talk today.
And yes, Happy Valentine’s Day!
Namaste!
Four hundred and forty nine is about the stages
of love!
I had told you about Seven Stages.
The movie refers to the seven too.
During my online research too, there was something
about the number seven that kept coming back..
Seven Stages.
What are those stages?
That is what we are going to see.
And, while looking at those seven stages,
I am not just going to restrict myself to
the Seven Stages in this relationship — man
and woman, husband and wife.
No.
I am also going to extend it, see if I can
draw some parallels and analogies, to this
relationship.
A person and a company.
For, somehow it strikes me, .. in many many
ways.. they even say “You are married to
the job!”
.. in many many ways, there are more similarities
here than we think!
In my case, I want married in 1998.
And, I got my first break, my real solid job
in ‘98.
So, when I look back at the 25 years that
have gone by, I see a lot of learnings that
I can get from one and apply to the other.
Come on, let us dive in!
These Seven Stages… they are not like…
you have to pass through each of them..
You have to spend these many years in each
of them..
No, nothing like that.
These Seven Stages — you can even frogjump
some stages..
Sometimes, you drop down to the previous stage..
It is a cycle, that gets progressively better…
That is how we should see it..
The first stage, of course, is The Honeymoon
Stage.
In this honeymoon phase, Passion drives everything.
You like them soooo much!
Your partner.. or in the other case, the company
you are an employee in.
You are head over heels in love..
They can do nothing wrong.
Nothing that they have done can ever be wrong!
In fact, you start loving their quirks…!
They will screw something up mightily, and
you will be at awe!
“How beautifully are they screwing up!
So endearing!!”
Holds true with the company too!
You will love the quirks of your company!
In fact, .. remember the company called Zoho?!
There are many who have fallen just for the
logo..
Colorful..
Playful..
Casually arranged boxes..
Oh so cute!
I know so many of those!
So, in this phase, the foundation for intimacy,
the foundation for closeness, the foundation
for trust is laid.
To call this childish, to call this an infatuation,
to advise against this, to advise that this
be avoided, is missing the whole point.
This is a great phase where you look forward
to greater things happening.
You can’t stay here forever.
You shouldn’t stay here forever.
Which is why they call it the Honeymoon Phase.
You have to come out of it.
But, this is a great phase that lays the platform
for future phases.
The Honeymoon Phase.
In just a few days past the Honeymoon Phase,
or a few weeks, or a few months, or a few
YEARS later, you arrive at the Realisation
Phase.
In this Realisation Phase, the grim reality
of it all sets in.
You start seeing warts..
Problems.
Irritations.
Troubles.
Mosquito bites.
Irregularities.
Imperfections.
Flaws.
You were blind to all these all along.
Your husband smokes and doesn’t even clear
the ashtray.
You leave the toilet flap up.
You don’t lock the door at night.
Messy.
This is the reality, but that reality is messy.
It can attack you gradually, or suddenly,
one fine morning, one Sunday afternoon, it
can hit you.
This is the Realisation Phase.
This Realisation is all about, this is what
they really are.
What you saw was the Trailer.
If you are the type who gets carried away
by the trailer, we can’t help you with that!
That Realisation Phase.
This is also a place where some disappointment,
some bitterness, some misunderstanding, some
conflict, the seeds of such discontent may
get sown.
The best advice both marriage counsellors
and career counsellors give is, “Open up
to your partners.
Open up to your colleagues.
To your manager.
To your HR.
To your company.
Share your thoughts freely.
Be assertive without being disrespectful.
No need to be disrespectful, but no need to
shut up and remain silent either.”
An important advice in this phase, this Realisation
Phase.
The third phase is the Rebellion phase.
I am perfect.
I deserve much more.
I can’t restrict myself to this shitty lifestyle,
shitty partnership I have been put into.
Sorry!
This is that sort of phase.
Differences, small differences, start magnifying.
And, at this time, small problems don’t
seem to go away.
They refuse to go away..
You don’t have the mindset to say, “It
is a small problem after all, let us grind
through it”..
Nor does the person on the other side have
the mindset where they can say, “They seem
to be bothered about it..
Why don’t we change this little matter from
now on?”
And, they make that classic mistake of trying
to change the other person..
Instead of looking inwards and introspecting,
their thoughts are all about “Can I change
the company” and the company thinks, “Can
I change this employee”.
Both?
They lead to disaster.
This problem, this Rebellion problem, if allowed
to grow uncontrolled for too long, we hear
about the infamous phrase, “The Seven Year
Itch”.
The boy or the girl runs away..
The employee puts in their papers.
Worse!
They don’t run away..
They stay and cheat!
We see that in relationships.
We see that in our work environment too.
Can I take a side-gig..?
Stationed inside, unconsciously, I start plotting
the downfall of the company I am in.
Dangerous!
That is why it is called The Rebellion.
A mutinous phase.
Number Four is the Reassessment Phase.
Things are going to get better.
Just a glance at that word gives us that hope.
This is where you take time to reflect.
Who am I?
Am I not imperfect too?
Is this not the person who committed to this
relationship considering me, this imperfect
me, a good enough human being?
So what if this person is imperfect?
My imperfections along with this person’s
imperfections, when they come together, can
they make a perfect whole?
Can we..
Can we show some gratitude towards all that
we have been through?
Can we develop gratitude?
We have built something after all!
What have we created?
We have created a relationship..
We have built a house..
We have made some friends.
Or, if you want to enter the domain of company
and employee, you have worked here, you have
launched a product, you have served customers,
you have made a dent in the universe, can’t
you be a little more grateful about that?
We have done it together!!
This Reassessment Phase is called by marriage
counsellors and career counsellors alike as
the Second Honeymoon.
The Reassessment Phase is where you rekindle
love.
You fell in love..!
Long ago, you fell in love.
Now, you consciously RISE in love.
That’s the Reassessment Phase.
If the Reassessment is done appropriately,
it is usually followed by a Reunion Phase.
You are growing.
You are growing older in the relationship.
You are growing more senior, in the employee-company
relationship.
All that you had created, they are growing
too.
Your children, they are growing up.
Your career, has reached a particular solidity.
It won’t be ruffled all too easily.
You won’t lose your job tomorrow.
You don’t need to be afraid about it all
the time.
Your financials are stable.
This is where the Reunion starts happening.
You start consciously focusing on physical,
mental, emotional health.
From the context of an employee-employer relationship,
most people say this is the most fulfilling
stage.
For, this is when the employee starts wondering,
“What can I leave behind as a legacy?
You have given me unconditionally for so long,
all these years.
Something makes me want to do something for
you in return.
This is beyond just a I-do-work-you-pay-salary
phase.
This is beyond all that.
What more can I do?”
This is the Reunion.
What comes after this Reunion Phase?
At least in the Western approach to things,
they introduce a Phase called the Explosion
Phase.
I was not able to relate to it naturally,
probably you can..
The Explosion Phase is supposed to be the
time a tragedy in the family, a health problem,
a financial incapacity, .. some sort of loss,
pain, disaster, some lifechanging moment happens..
Or, your children grow up, go for higher studies,
or leave home to pursue their career.. and
the house becomes empty suddenly..
They call it The Empty Nest..
“Oh my God, we need to keep looking at each
other from now on?”
That time, is the Explosion Phase.
This is an inflection point.
It can take the story in either direction.
Towards disaster, or towards consummation.
If I were to draw a parallel with the employee-employer
relationship that we have been talking about
all along, I am empathising with all those
techies..
The nineties-kids, the eighties-kids, .. who
probably now are all managers..
Senior managers.
It would have been quite a while since they
actively developed software, wrote code, did
real work..
They manage work.
They get work done.
Important role, no doubt.
But, they are not in the thick of things.
And, at this time, .. when a genie out of
the bottle like ChatGPT comes out, something
paradigm-shifting, .. who do they look to
for help?
Do they ask the company?
Will it help?
Will the company understand what these people
are passing through?
Or, will they just be focused on, “What
can I do best with all these amazing youngsters
coming in… with amazing new knowledge…
let these oldies just rot..!”
Will that be their approach?
Much depends on how the company and the employee
deal with such tidal waves.
The Explosion.
I am able to relate to it better now.
The final stage is the Completion Stage.
The sunset phase, some may call it.
Nothing more to do, is the feeling of the
moment.
The contentment.
The contentment that comes from realising
that not all known peaks need to be summited
before feeling satisfied!
It is not, “I have conquered every peak
there is, and hence I am content..”
It is, “I know there are peaks I have left
unconquered, and it is OKAY!”
That kind of contentment.
You enjoy each others’ company.
(Pun intended!)
You enjoy the company.
And the company enjoys you.
Not because you are the best.
But because you have lasted.
For, this lasting?
In family relationships, as well as in employee-employer
relationships, is so hard to come by these
days.
A strength of commitment.
Like an unshakeable pillar.
Like a venerable old banyan.
Protecting.
Weathering.
Passing through.
Surviving.
And thriving.
And only when you have people like that, only
from people like that, can you learn by observing,
by being with them.
Too many startups suffer from this biggest
problem (even without realising it themselves!)
There is no old-timer!
Everybody is two years old in the company.
When there is a person who has been around
for twenty-five long years, what all must
they have been through?
What all great positives and great negatives
they must have crossed?
Do you think they never ever fought even once
with their employer?
OF COURSE they would have!
How did they overcome it?
What compromise did they draw?
What was the Win-Win they worked towards?
How much there is to learn!
Very similarly, instead of being stuck in
a 2BHK all by yourselves, if you were lucky
to be part of a large joint family… in one
corner, there is a grand-old pa and grand-old
ma, a 93 year old and an 89 year old!
The life lessons they can give us, if only
we ask them?
If only we just silently observe..
Worth their weight in gold..
Whichever phase we may be in, by the way,
there is one thing we can all do to survive
and float past that phase without too much
accident.
It is picturised so beautifully in this movie.
Remember Bruce Almighty?
This is a follow up, called Evan Almighty.
God Himself has a conversation with a human
being.
Orders him to build an Ark.
Noah’s Ark.
(The great ship(?)) And only later, does God
explain what ARK actually meant.
One act of random kindness.
Act of Random Kindness.
To put it simply, you don’t need to go in
search of auspicious days or propitious moments.
To say Sorry.
To offer Thank You.
To gush I Love You.
Take this as my .. probably only message for
the day.
I am sure you will be a happier person, and..
you will LIVE with a happier person.
As a closing thought something that I found
in this oddly arcane book..
A book from 1930.. a drama.. features this
beautiful quote.
The quote goes like this.
“Women marry men hoping they will change.
Men marry women hoping they won’t.
And, each is inevitably disappointed!”
Interesting, is it not?
We will meet next week!
Thank you!